From the New York Times, I'm Rachel
Abrams and [music] this is the Daily.
[music]
As wildfire seasons grow longer and
deadlier, states are increasingly
relying on private [music] companies to
provide thousands of firefighters to the
front lines.
Today, my colleague Hannah Dryer
explains how lacks rules and regulatory
loopholes [music]
have left many of these firefighters
sick, in debt, and on their own.
It's [music] Tuesday, October 28th.
Hannah, it feels like every year there
are more and more wildfires and you have
spent months investigating one specific
aspect of wildfires, which is the
wildfire fighting industry. So, I'd love
to start off with you telling us what
got you interested in that particular
angle. I first started thinking about
this after the fires that tore through
Los Angeles in January. I saw that there
was all this footage, all these pictures
coming in of the people who were
fighting those fires. And I couldn't
help but notice that there were all of
these firefighters out there standing in
what looked like the most toxic black
smoke and none of them were wearing
masks. And it got me wondering why is
that? And what might be the consequences
of working in that kind of environment
with no protection? And so I started
digging into the industry of people who
fight wildfires. And what I discovered
is that it's completely unlike any
industry. They are out there in these
really hazardous conditions and they
work without protection. And a lot of
them are getting very sick at young
ages. And when they develop things like
severe lung damage or cancer, things
that are linked to this smoke exposure,
they're often on their own. often they
don't even have basic health insurance.
>> So basically they're vulnerable at
several different stages of this process
from starting work to actually getting
sick.
>> Exactly. I mean what a lot of people
have told me is they feel like they put
their health on the line to protect
people and then when they get sick
themselves there's sort of no one there
protecting them.
>> And this is not a small issue. There are
tens of thousands of people who do this
work almost year round now. And as
wildfire season grows longer and gets
more intense, this is something that is
just going to become more and more
urgent. So to get my arms around this, I
talked to hundreds of firefighters. Many
of them were very sick,
>> but there was one story that really
stood out to me.
>> Hi, come on in. I'm Matt. I'm Joel's
dad.
>> This is a young man named Joel Eisinger.
>> So, can we go all the way back to your
childhood and start there? just a lot of
riding bicycles and a lot of races.
>> Joel was a shy kid who moved around a
lot. He didn't always have an easy time
making friends. He was really physical.
He went on long hikes, long bike rides.
He played lacrosse in high school and
his nickname was battering ram. But he
had a hard time focusing in school.
Sometimes he didn't go to class. He sort
of barely managed to graduate. And once
he graduated, he wasn't sure what he was
going to do.
>> Uh, got a job at Taco Bell.
>> He was living in Oregon. He got a job at
Taco Bell. And one night,
>> I watched a movie called Only the Brave.
>> I worked [music] this blaze near Big
Timber, Montana.
>> He started watching this movie on TV
called Only the Brave.
>> No matter what's going on, we can't go
back up there. Stay together. Everyone
here.
>> It's a movie that's about this tragedy
that happened a few [music] years ago
where basically an entire crew of
wildland firefighters died burned by a
fire.
>> Soup. I just want to thank you for
pulling me out earlier.
>> It was definitely an ass pucker, wasn't
it?
>> No doubt, man. I thought I was dying.
>> And it's this tragic movie, but his
reaction to it was to focus on the bond
between these crew members.
>> This ain't the greatest job in the
world. I don't know what is.
>> Got that right.
>> So, in the movie, these guys are always
joking. They're really close. And that
really appealed to Joel. I mean, he's
working at like a fast food restaurant
during the day. And to him, this is
like, oh my god, it's a way to be
outside, have friends, and be doing what
he's best at, which is this sort of like
physical work. So, the very next day, he
goes and applies to work for a company
called Pacific Oasis.
>> And what's Pacific Oasis? Pacific Oasis
is one of hundreds of companies that now
offer private firefighting services to
the federal government. And these are
easier jobs to get than working directly
for the federal government doing
firefighting.
>> Like less red tape.
>> Yeah. Less paperwork to fill out, fewer
hoops to jump through. You can get hired
on the spot. And so they attract a lot
of people like Joel who maybe were a
little a drift in life. So it's an
easier job to get than working for the
federal government. But there's a
trade-off, which is that there are a lot
fewer protections and fewer benefits. So
most people working for these companies
don't have health insurance, for
example. They have less training and
overall they're just sort of less
protected.
>> Um, so at Taco Bell, I had a manager. He
brought up Pacific Oasis actually. So
like I had that in my head already
[snorts] and uh he just told me all the
cool stories and I was like, "Oh, this
is sweet, man." You know, he's like, "I
don't hire anybody. I just want
>> So Joel walks in the door. He meets with
the president of the company. He's like,
"This is uh you're exactly what we're
looking for."
>> And signs him up for training straight
away
>> on the spot.
>> And he's almost immediately sent out to
a major fire. And he's still 18 at this
point. His father, Matt, remembers
driving him down to the Pacific Oasis
headquarters.
>> So, I went down there with him and
dropped him off at the fire like it was
a sporting event, you know what I mean?
And I was incredibly worried about him,
of course, as I I think most parents
would be. But
>> Matt was so worried that Joel was going
to go out in this really dangerous
situation. He knows his son is sort of
hard-headed, maybe sometimes push his
boundaries. And he knew he couldn't stop
Joel from signing up for this work. Joel
was determined, but he was really
worried. Understandably,
>> right? So Steve saw me just nervously
pacing and waiting. and he Steve came up
to me and he approached me and I was
staying out of
>> and Steve Dods who's the president of
Pacific Oasis comes over and talks to
Matt and reassures him
>> and he said, "Hey, we'll take good care
of him. He's going to be all right." And
anybody could say that, but I truly did
believe him. I I respected him at that.
>> And then Joel gets in a truck and he
drives off to his very first fire.
>> So, can you tell us about your first
fire? Uh it was like California coming
to the Oregon border. So we were there
to like protect it coming into Oregon.
>> This fire was called the Clamathon fire.
Every fire has a name.
>> So we were doing a lot of direct hand
line. So that's you're at the fire's
edge. You're digging down to like bare
mineral soil creating like a small fire
break that the fire stops.
>> So fighting a wildfire is not like what
we sort of imagine when we think of
firefighting. There's not usually water
and hoses involved. It's more like
you're digging a containment line.
>> I would definitely think that any kind
of firefighting required water. So, this
is interesting.
>> I mean, what it is is that wildfires are
too big to put out with water. They can
really only be trapped and contained.
>> You're just trying to stop it from
spreading on the ground. Basically,
small flames smoldering. And
>> but what that means for somebody like
Joel is that you're just working right
next to the fire in a way that's sort of
unbelievable.
Joel's first night [music] was basically
trapesing around on a cliff's edge right
next to the act of fire.
>> The scariest part about that first fire
was uh they call it a freight train. You
start hearing the fire. You can't see
it, but you just start hearing trees
just torching and running. It sounds
like Yeah. train.
>> He told me about how he was hearing
trees snapsh.
>> So, he's crossing checkpoints.
>> National Guard was there. Uh they shut
down all highways now.
>> And he gets to drive around them to go
to this sort of offlimit space with his
crew.
>> Um I'm like I thought it was the coolest
thing ever, you know.
>> And it's this wild unpredictable scene.
>> It's pure chaos, dude. Flames start
ripping, wind changes
>> where he is right next to these flames,
>> fire on both sides of us. It's like I
look up like a 200t wall of flames just
like 50 ft away from me and I'm just
like everybody's
>> and he's starting to get to know these
guys who are sort of teaching him how to
be out there and stay safe [music] but
also teasing him.
>> My closest friends I met on that first
fire, you know, I've kept that circle
>> for him. It was
>> everything he had hoped it might be to
to go out and fight a wildfire.
It sounds like he found that Band of
Brothers element that he was really
drawn to. Absolutely. So after that, he
was pretty much hooked. He worked six
more fire seasons. He learned to work a
chainsaw. And that meant that he would
sort of be out in front of the rest of
the crew leading this group of guys deep
into the woods, cutting down trees,
cutting down flaming branches.
>> It took me three about 3 years to be
able to walk through the woods without
falling over, if that makes sense. like
with a chainsaw with all the weight took
about 3 years.
>> He would be hiking with a 50 lb pack
just you know him, his friends and
nature.
>> You're you're removed from like everyday
life and I don't like everyday life
personally. So it's like I like that you
know
>> it's really physically demanding but it
was also for him really rewarding and
made him proud. He felt like it was
finally something that he was just
naturally good at.
>> Just freedom. Being on fires doesn't
feel like a job. It's like makebelieve
stuff that we do out there, you know?
It's just fairy land [__] So, it's
cool.
>> But it also involved a lot of risk. He
fell down a burning hill once. He almost
cut into his foot with his chainsaw. He
got full body poison oak.
>> And one of the most dangerous things
about the work was a natural byproduct
of fires, which was breathing in smoke.
and nobody out there wore masks. Why
wouldn't they wear masks? Masks weren't
provided when he started this work. And
they also weren't allowed. And this is a
longtime Forest Service policy. And what
the Forest Service says is that wearing
a mask could increase your risk of heat
stroke. The work is really taxing. It's
usually pretty hot out there. And the
concern is if you're out there with
something over your face, maybe you
would start to overheat. Wildland
firefighters in other parts of the world
do wear masks and there has not been a
heat stroke issue there, but that's what
the Forest Service says. But there was
also this cultural element of not
wanting to seem weak. Firefighters sort
of see masks as like silly as a sign
that you're not going to be up to the
job. And breathing in smoke is seen as a
sign that you're willing to, you know,
take sacrifices and focus on the work at
hand and you're not going to get too
caught up in your own comfort. So
basically, even if they had been
provided with masks, what you're saying
is that they probably wouldn't have worn
them because of this culture.
>> Yeah, there is this macho fireline
culture, but I also think it's worth
noting that at this point, firefighters
like Joel weren't told that there was
any reason to be concerned about smoke.
So part of it maybe is that they thought
that the masks could make them look
weak, but they also maybe just had no
reason to think that there would be a
real benefit to wearing them.
>> But the smoke exposure was really
intense. Pacific Oasis workers told me
morning sounded like an emphyma clinic
in their fire camps. They were coughing.
They had black stuff coming out their
noses. There's something called camp
cred that goes around these fire camps
where everyone will be coughing and
everyone will be sort of feeling sick
and people just think of it as like a
natural consequence of the work. For
Joel, it was sort of like being sore. It
was just something that he thought came
along with fighting fires. And for him,
it was proof that he was doing something
right and he was putting in the right
amount of effort. He was really focused
on trying to get his boss Steve's
attention and show Steve that he was
tough and he should be sent out on more
fires and maybe promoted. So, he was
working really hard. He was trying to
impress Steve. Show Steve that he would
make any sacrifice. And
>> he would cough up black stuff.
>> Exactly. Go out for weeks and weeks
without complaining.
and he was getting these positive
reviews. Steve seemed to be liking what
he was doing. And eventually Steve
invited him to start training to be a
crew boss, which meant that he would
lead his own team of about 20 people.
And that for Joel was one of the
proudest moments of his life. It was so
validating.
>> Did you imagine spending your whole
career in fire?
>> Oh, yeah. I already knew I was in. Yeah.
I knew that's a job I wanted probably
when I was 19. I was probably going to
stick with that one. you know, I'm good
at it.
I'm really good at it.
>> And he started to see this as probably
being his lifelong career.
And that's why what happened next felt
like such a betrayal.
[music]
We'll be right back.
So Hannah, it sounds like Joel is
basically living his dream life. When do
things start taking a turn for the worst
for him?
>> Yeah. So looking back at it, uh I had a
lot of different signs.
>> Everything started falling apart last
year. It was the 4th of July weekend.
>> You know, I was extremely probably the
best shape I ever been in my life before
that. You know, [snorts]
I just did my crew boss class.
>> He was fighting a fire in Northern
California staying in a hotel.
>> I broke out in a rash.
>> He had this strange rash that was sort
of creeping up his legs
>> my body and it was so painful, dude. And
I didn't know what was going on.
>> It really hurt. It looked like nothing
he'd ever seen before, but he didn't
want to complain.
>> And we're staying in hotels, right? So
everybody was like, "Oh, you got bed
bugs." Everybody's like freaking out.
>> And so he let it slide. Then his crew
moves deep into the forest and they
start camping there to get closer to the
fire line.
>> And day nine or 10, my face started to
like droop.
>> That's when his crew mates notice that
his face is drooping. Half of his mouth
is sort of just hanging open.
>> Every fire you go on, there's going to
be one thing that's always bugging you.
You're going to have blisters,
something, some fingernail messed up.
You're going to have something.
>> And again, he wants to be seen as this,
you know, tough person who could be a
crew boss. And so he keeps going,
working these 12-hour shifts until the
end of their deployment. That's when a
medic finally sees him and says, "You
need to get to the hospital. You might
have had a stroke." Were people worried
about him? Do we know during the period
that he's working with a a drooping
face?
>> You know, people noticed it, but nobody
was that worried. And I think that
partly goes back to this fire line
culture. I mean, firefighters say if you
get injured out on the fire line, you
just rub dirt in it and keep walking. Oh
my god.
>> So, everybody is just very focused on
getting this fire under control and
keeping going sort of no matter what
happens.
>> So, the medic tells him, "You need
urgent medical attention. Does he go to
a hospital? Does he heed that advice?"
>> So, Joel opts not to take an ambulance.
He instead is driven by Steve, the owner
of the company.
>> And in my opinion, I'm going to the
hospital, right? So, but
>> he thinks that Steve is going to take
him to the hospital. That's sort of the
protocol for a moment like that.
>> Mhm. Instead, he was driven 90 minutes
back from the fire line. And then he's
surprised because Steve drops him off at
his dad's house. It's almost midnight at
this point. He looks drawn. He looks
weak.
>> You could have asked me what color this
guy was and I probably didn't know.
That's how just messed up I was. You
know, my body was just shutting down.
>> When I saw him in that state, I knew
this isn't
a cold.
>> And his dad realized that something is
terribly wrong here. I drove to the
hospital thinking that he's going to die
at any moment. I knew it.
>> And immediately takes him to the
emergency room.
>> There's no going back from something
like that happening as a parent.
>> So, at the hospital, doctors start
running tests and it takes a few days of
tests and Joel is getting weaker and
weaker. At this point, he can't even
really walk down the hallway. And
eventually, they come back with an
answer that nobody expects. He is
diagnosed with acute myoid leukemia,
which is an aggressive blood cancer that
is most often seen in people in their
60s and 70s. Not somebody Joel's age.
>> And how old was he at that point?
>> He is diagnosed the day before he turns
25.
>> Wow.
>> That moment it's still in jog for him.
So feels fake,
>> but it's not. You know,
>> he needs immediate chemotherapy,
immediate blood transfusions.
That rash that was creeping up his legs
turns out to have been his blood
basically just breaking down without
treatment. He could die within a matter
of weeks. And the truth is, even with
medical interventions, only about half
of patients with this kind of cancer
survive a year. But all Joel is thinking
about in these days is how quickly he
can get through treatment and get back
to fighting fires.
>> So I was really excited, man, to go back
with that crew. I was locked in with
that crew, but it was a good crew. They
got the most hours out of any of the
crews, you know.
>> He's sort of not understanding how
serious the situation is, how in danger
he is of dying,
and he's just focused on this life that
he thought was in front of him. It
sounds like he almost couldn't accept
the reality of what was actually
happening to his body. Yes. I mean, it's
so jarring for him, like he just can't
really process what's going on. But for
his father, the reality was very clear.
And he was thinking back to that first
day when he dropped off Joel and Steve
said that he would take care of his son.
>> He got dropped off at my doorstep by the
same person not seven years prior had
told me, "Hey, we're going to take care
of him."
>> For his part, Steve says that he
understood that this was going to be a
long diagnostic process for Joel. it
wasn't going to be a quick thing and he
was trying to do Joel a favor by letting
him rest at home and then go into the
hospital the next day. But Matt just
cannot get over that moment, that
nightmare moment of seeing your child.
He felt like on death store and they're
being taken to your house instead of
taken to get medical care.
>> They let him linger out there having
facial paralysis, drooling, and all this
stuff going on. He had no control over
his muscles, pain. He wasn't okay.
>> And what happened to him really could
have happened at any private
firefighting company. No matter who he
worked for, he would probably have been
out there without a mask in heavy smoke
and he might have ended up in this exact
situation at the hospital sick with
cancer.
But I think that for Matt and eventually
for Joel, they got really fixated on
these specifics of where he got dropped
off, what time it was because they felt
like Joel was just sort of dumped, like
he had been a disposable worker all
along. And so they felt really mad. And
meanwhile, all of these medical bills
started to come in.
>> I was paying that first hospital bill. I
didn't have insurance. I was paying that
[__] out of my pocket, right? He and
Matt felt like Pacific Oasis should be
held accountable since he had gotten
sick on their watch. And workers
compensation covers things like lost
wages and hospital bills when employees
get sick on the job. So Joel and Matt
decide they are going to file a workers
compensation claim. They go down to
Pacific Oasis and Steve pulls them into
a room
>> room and said there's no way you guys
can prove this is workrelated. And I
said what?
>> He basically said anything could have
caused this. trying our best.
>> Our workers compensation policy is not
going to pay for this.
>> I'm not trying to prove anything. I'm
just trying to say that this happened to
him on a fire. Let's get him covered
right now until we can figure this out.
[clears throat] You know what I mean?
>> But they filed the claim anyway. And
ultimately, the workers comp insurer
denies their claim.
>> So, I was just using money out of out of
pocket basically.
>> Oh, yeah.
>> Out of pocket.
>> And why couldn't they prove this link?
It's almost impossible to prove that any
individual cancer case comes from
wildfire smoke. And that sort of shields
the whole firefighting industry from
responsibility.
People who work at the Forest Service
have told me that this is one reason
that firefighters historically have not
been provided with masks because if you
give somebody a mask, it's essentially
acknowledging that smoke is risky and
could cause some sort of long-term
illness. We're not going to give you a
mask that could protect you because that
would be an admission that you are in
danger doing this work. So therefore, we
were going to leave you unprotected.
This is what whistleblowers have been
telling me that there's just sort of
been this culture of denial around how
dangerous smoke is because what do you
do once you acknowledge that you have to
really change how fires are fought?
>> The government might start to have to
provide more staffing so that people
could take breaks from smoke. Then they
might have to start covering this whole
range of health conditions. Okay. So the
employers don't acknowledge a link
between the work and the illness here.
But is there a link between the work and
the type of cancer that Joel got? Like
what do we know about that for sure? So
until the 1980s, people thought that
wildfire smoke was basically benign like
a campfire. But since then, there's been
a lot of research that has shown pretty
definitively that wildfire smoke is
linked to cardiovascular issues, lung
issues, and at least 12 kinds of
cancers. So, responding to this growing
body of research, in 2022, Congress
actually forced the Forest Service to
start offering workers compensation
benefits for a list of more than a dozen
cancers that are most strongly
associated with smoke exposure. But
that's not how it works for this large
group of other firefighters working on
contract for the Forest Service, but
working for private companies. So
basically, if you work directly for the
federal government fighting fires, you
will get coverage. But if you work for a
private company that works for the
Forest Service, you will not get
coverage. Exactly. So if you've had, you
know, Joel's career and then you develop
leukemia and you're working for the
Forest Service, you now don't have to
prove where your cancer came from. It's
just assumed that it came from your work
on fires because there's such a strong
link. But for Joel, he would have to
prove where his cancer came from, which
is almost impossible.
>> So basically, for somebody like Joel, he
is completely on his own, it sounds
like, to cover the cost of his
treatment.
>> Yes. And as you can imagine, it was
extremely expensive. The family spent
basically everything they had trying to
pay for this. And how was Joel doing
through all of this? Was the treatment
working?
The chemotherapy starts to fight back
the cancer, but it takes a tremendous
physical toll on Joel. He could barely
move. He was in pain all the time. He
would crawl up to his attic bedroom on
hands and knees. By the winter though,
he started to get better. His cancer
went into remission and he started
recovering a little bit of strength. He
went out with his father to try to go on
a hike like he used to do with him. And
at first he could only take these sort
of stuttering steps, but little by
little he was able to recover a little
bit of of who he had been. It sounds
like he beat the odds.
I mean, he went into remission. His
doctors were very careful to explain
that the cancer could come back at any
time, and it often does. And if it did
come back, chemotherapy wouldn't be
enough. He would have to have a bone
marrow transplant. But after Joel got
the sign off from his doctors in the
spring, he sort of went back to that
place of aimlessness that he had been in
after graduating high school. He didn't
quite know what to do. He felt a drift
and his mind started drifting back to
fighting fires. He started sort of
fantasizing about, well, like what if I
went back there? He wanted to go back to
the line.
>> He wanted to go back to the line. It's
where his friends are. It's a way to
start making money to pay off his debts.
>> And Joel is very hung up on that last
fire that he fought and how he got sick
and he wasn't able to to keep going. He
really sees that as a defeat. And in a
lot of ways, he says he wants to redeem
himself by getting back out on the fire
line.
>> Sure, I'm motivated. I can go do fire,
but can I do a 14-day run? I don't know.
[snorts]
>> Probably try till I die again. You know,
that's one of those things.
>> Some pretty tough.
>> He actually went and asked Steve for his
job back and Steve told him, "Are you
crazy? You're think that firefighting
gave you this cancer. You're going to go
back. Isn't that tempting fate?" So
Steve wouldn't hire him. He couldn't get
a job locally. So he bought a ticket to
go to Alaska where there are a lot more
federal wildland firefighting jobs.
>> Wow. And Matt desperately wants Joel to
do any kind of work besides
firefighting. But he also knows that if
he pushes too hard, he could alienate
Joel. So he's walking this really fine
line.
>> Even though everybody's telling me I'm
insane, but I don't care what anybody
thinks. Like at the end of the day, it's
just all all I know.
>> His kind of cancer is very aggressive.
It doesn't have a great prognosis. In
his mind, he is likely still to die from
this cancer.
>> If I got if I got a year left in my
life, I'm going to do the last year
doing some [__] I'd enjoy, right?
>> I mean, the damage is already done,
right?
>> No.
>> Yeah. Oh, yeah. I mean, it's too late to
turn back. I mean, [__]
>> He feels like everything he's doing now
is just sort of borrowed time. And if he
ends up dying in his 20s, he wants to
just keep going and keep being that
strong firefighter.
It really strikes [music] me that there
will always be a Joel. There will always
be people who need this kind [music] of
work, who want to do this kind of work,
and an industry that needs [music]
Joles, right? It's true. There are tens
of thousands of wildland firefighters.
And as wildfire season grows longer and
the fires grow more intense, the
government is increasingly turning to
[music]
firefighters like Joel and people get
into this work young. They really want
to do it. [music] And when they get
sick, the industry just sort of moves on
and there's always going to be another
young person to come and replace them.
>> [music]
>> Hannah, thank you so much. Thank you,
[music] Rachel.
[music]
Not long after Hannah published the
first story in this investigative
series, Congress held oversight hearings
citing her reporting [music] and
pressured the agency to make changes.
and soon after it did, reversing its
decadesl long ban on masks [music] and
announcing it will provide masks to all
of its firefighters and encourage them
to use them. No plans have been
announced to [music] extend worker
compensation coverage to contract
firefighters.
[music]
We'll be right back.
Here's
what else you need to know. Today, Prime
[music] Minister Andrew Holes of Jamaica
ordered mandatory evacuations and issued
dire safety warnings as Hurricane
Melissa, with winds of 175 mph, and
enough [music] moisture to drop nearly 3
ft of rain, churned toward his country
and its 2.8 million people on Monday.
Dangerous winds, catastrophic [music]
flooding, and a storm surge as high as
13 ft were expected in Jamaica as soon
as Monday night, long before the [music]
hurricane's expected landfall on Tuesday
morning.
Today's [music] episode was produced by
Nina Feldman, Jess Chung, and Diana Wyn.
It was edited by Devon Taylor, contains
music by Marian Lozano and Alicia
Bitube, [music] and was engineered by
Alyssa Moxley.
>> [music]
>> That's it for the Daily. I'm Rachel
Abrams. See you tomorrow.